All right so let's talk about our first loop the for loop.
If you've never seen four loops before.
Buckle up the syntax is a little bit odd.
The first time you see it but you'll use it so often that eventually just makes sense.
So this is a representation of the syntax sort of the pattern.
I know it looks like a lot of looks very confusing.
But let's take it step by step.
So a for loop is very similar to a conditional not in the way that it works but in the syntax we have
a conditional statement here we have if and then something in parents and then a block of code enclosed
by curly braces and whatever code I put in here will only run if this condition is true.
This code is associated with that.
If when we write a for loop it's the same pattern we have for which is the keyword.
Has to be four not uppercase for not f o you are it needs to be F O R and then we have parents and we'll
talk about what goes in there in just a moment and then we have curly braces and code block and whatever
content is in here will run every time this loop repeats.
So if I loop 10 times this a particular code is going to run 10 times.
I'm not sure if that's how you pronounce that.
So what is the syntax what goes in here.
It's it's a little tricky to explain.
There are three separate pieces a lot of times people come to JavaScript or students who come from other
languages.
Ask Is there an easy way to just run something 10 times no matter what some languages do you have a
really easy way to say make this happen 10 times let's say I have counseled out log I want to cancel
that log Hello 10 times without a loop the obvious way is to do this and that sucks and I think I'd
only at 9 times but there we go ten times but this is obviously horrendous and this is only ten times
we're running something but there are many situations if we have an array of ten thousand items or even
a thousand items each one is different if we had to write it by hand to print out each item in the array
that would be a nightmare we would do something like cancel that log array of zero and then manually
array of 1 and array of 2 if we have even just 100.
My fingers are going to fall off by the time I finish typing that out.
So we use loops but a for loop is not as easy as saying make this happen 10 times or 20 times there
are three separate pieces.
The main idea behind a for loop is that we define a variable in this variable is like a counter it's
a counter for that loop and we started at some value if I want to run something ten times I'll just
do 10 total times I could start a variable zero at 1 I could start it at 50 it doesn't really matter
where it starts at least in this case and then I define a stopping point.
So if I went from 50 I'm going to go upwards I'll say we'll stop when we hit 60.
That would give me 10 iterations and then the third step is what happens to this variable each time
through.
So if we're trying to run ten times I would say add one to the variable ten different times.
So there are three pieces the initial value when to run the loop and then how to change value each time.
This kind of looks like gibberish here.
So let's revisit our slide.
We have four and then parens we will define a variable let's say it starts at zero then we'll say a
condition and this condition is something like While that variable is less than 10 run this loop and
then we increment that variable by one or by two or by negative five.
It's up to us.
So here's a simple example we're going to define a variable in this loop.
That's the first piece the initial value for a variable.
Usually people will use the variable name I because it's short and it doesn't have to mean very much.
I think originally maybe it stand stood for index or integer.
It doesn't matter but you'll see people use.
I J K you can name this whatever you want it's just a variable you're making let's have it start let's
go with one we'll have it start at 1 and then we need a semicolon then we have a second piece which
tells javascript when this loop should continue running for so we're going to run as long as I is less
center equal to 10 as soon as we're past 10.
It should stop and then we tell it how to update I each time through the loop.
It's pretty standard to do I plus plus because a lot of the time you want to loop one number at a time
one and then two and then three and then four but you could also do plus equals three.
This would loop by threes.
So we would start with one and then we add three.
So we get four and then we add three and we'd have seven.
Then we add three and we hit 10.
And then if you did it again we would get 13 at which point we're past this.
So it no longer runs but let's just add one each time using that nice shortcut.
Plus plus.
And we could start by simply consider logging Hello 10 times.
I'm going to refresh my code over here so annoying that the chrome console does this.
It collects all those 10 identical constant logs and displays them as one with the number 10 next to
it.
So it did print out ten times it's just hard to see.
So why don't we also print out I so I'll just do a hello colon and then the variable i.
Which is our loop variable.
I'll refresh the page.
And there we go.
So to step through this one more time.
So make a variable.
I started at 1.
Keep looping.
If I is less than or equal to 10 and then add one to I each time through.
So I started at 1.
That's less than 10.
So we're going to cancel that log.
I.
Which gives us hello 1.
Which is what we see here.
And then I is incremented so I becomes two because we did plus plus.
Is I still less than or equal to 10.
Yes it is.
So we cancel that log too.
So that's printed out now.
I it's going to be added 1 or have one added to it again.
2 we get 3.
This keeps going until I is 9 at which case we're still in the clear.
We add one I becomes 10.
This is still true because we have less than or equal to 10 so that's fine.
But then we print out Hello 10 after which I is incremented to eleven and then this is no longer true.
I is not less than or equal to 10.
Eleven is greater than 10.
So we are done with the loop so this loop is going to run ten times because of the way I set it up but
if I instead said I starts at 5 it only runs five times or 6 I can't do math because we're including
10 1 2 3 4 5 6.
If I instead did I equals 1 but instead of I plus plus I did plus equals 3.
I'll duplicate this so we have a record of the original.
I'm now going to increment by 3.
Refresh the page and this is what we get four total times that it ran and the value of I was 1 4 7 and
then 10 afterwards became 13 and the loop stopped.
So if you feel comfortable with the syntax at this point go ahead and move on we have more to talk about
with for loops in the next couple videos.
But if you want some more practice I'll do a few more examples.
Let's generate the first 20 perfect squares.
Now a perfect square is just a number of times itself.
So the first one is 1 times 1.
Then we have 2 times two we have three times three which is nine four times for 16 all the way up until
20 times 20.
So to print those out I would need to loop from one to 20 and then canceled out log each number of times
itself.
So the loop from one to 20 we need to initialize a variable at one and we can name it anything.
Like I said I is very very standard but just to prove it that it doesn't matter.
Let's go with NUM.
So we'll start at 1 num as 1 will continue.
While num is less than or equal to 20 or alternatively less than 21 I like to do it this way if I know
I want to include 20 I like to put less than or equals instead of this.
I don't know why it's an extra character.
Other people prefer it the other way around but I'll do it this way.
And each time through we will add one to num so let's make sure we're generating the correct numbers
by just constant logging each num okay one to 20.
Now we want to print the perfect square instead which is Num Times num.
And I think I'm actually going to do a little string template literal so that I print something out
like four times four equals sixteen so I will interpolate here and display NUM and then X for multiplication
and then interpolate again with a dollar sign display name again.
Let's just see what we get now.
1 times 1 20 times 20.
And then I'm going to add my equal sign and then interpolate one more time with a dollar sign and do
my actual math.
None.
Num Times num refresh the page.
Awesome.
One times one is one four nine sixteen twenty five.
All the way up to 400.
So this is looping in one direction we're going from a low number up to a higher number.
I'll also show that we can go the opposite direction.
So here's a loop where I starts at 50 and we subtract ten each time and we continue looping as long
as I is greater than or equal to zero.
So as long as it's positive or zero so 50 we subtract 10.
Next time is 40 then 30 than 20 than 10 then zero then we're done.
So this is counting backwards.
And you can definitely do that.
We'll do one more example of that.
Let's come at this one out.
Let's count down from two hundred and count down in intervals of twenty five.
So two hundred one seventy five.
One fifty one twenty five.
One hundred.
So we'll go back to using AI because that is the standard term unless we have nested loops in which
case you'll see we use other letters like J and K.
We're not going to start at zero.
We'll start at two hundred if that's what we're going to do.
We'll loop while I is greater than or equal to zero so not less than we definitely want greater than
if we have high starting at 200.
And we're saying run this loop while i is less than zero.
It's never going to run because two hundred is already greater than zero.
So if I tried that each time through we will subtract twenty five.
Let's see what we get counted out log.
Does it work.
Refresh the page.
We don't get anything and that's because we wrote our loop in such a way that it's never true.
I begins at two hundred and this is checked is two hundred less than or equal to zero.
Nope.
So nothing happens we just move on to the next line.
So if I put this line down here after the loop we would see that it is the only thing to run or the
only thing to print out.
So what I wanted to do is go from 200 down to zero.
So I want to go while I is greater than or equal to zero.
I want to stop when I becomes negative and will subtract twenty five each time.
Remember this is a shorthand way of saying I equals I minus 25.
It's easier just to do minus equals twenty five.
Let's try it and instead of saying does it work let's just print out.
I never go 200 175 150 all the way down until we hit zero which is the last thing we print out the last
I.
At which point I zero we subtract twenty five which gives us negative twenty five.
This is now false and we no longer print anything out and the code moves on and this runs instead.
So when we do have a loop like we have here this code is going to keep running over and over and over
and tell the loop is false.
This condition is false and then whatever happens afterwards will run.
OK.
So for loops are a lot.
I know they're always a little tricky to teach to people who have never coded before.
Unfortunately there's just a lot of there's not many moving pieces but the syntax is kind of ugly.
Just remember the three pieces you're a variable that you're using for the loop usually called I.
You give it some initial value then the next part after semicolon is the condition that checks if the
loop should continue running.
So the loop will run as long as this is true and then another semicolon and then whatever operation
you're performing on high usually adding or subtracting but you could also multiply you could divide.
You can do anything there but most of the time we're doing simple math and ninety nine percent of the
stuff I do at least is adding 1.
It's really really common that you just want to add one to something as we'll see when we work with
arrays and strings and just a video or two.
OK.
That's a lot I know hopefully you're still there.
Good job.